But Laden was not a lit scholar. His training was an engineer, you know,
some biographers claim that he was a Playboy for much of his youth,
but really the, the, the, these ideas. And I think that's probably,
I think why they chose the twin towers. I mean, this is, uh,
an imagination fueled by training and engineering. I mean, a lot of the,
you know, the sociology, if you do a kind of post of a lot of these leading, um,
jihadists, their backgrounds are not in Islamic scholarship,
but actually in engineering and kind of practical sciences and, and professions,
medical doctors are, are among their ranks. Um,
and so there's long been attention between Islamic scholars who devote their
whole lives to study of texts and commentary and interpretation.
And then what some scholars call kind of new intellectuals,
new Muslim authorities who actually have secular university educations
often in the natural sciences or engineering in technical fields,
who then bring that kind of mindset, if you will,
to what Muslim scholars call the religious sciences, which are,
you know, a field of kind of ambiguity and of gradation and of
subtlety and nuance,
and really of decades of training before one becomes authoritative to speak
about issues like whether or not it's legitimate to take someone else's life
were the relation to Afghanistan who was bin Laden, bin Laden was a,
a visitor. Um, if we look at his whole life course,
part of it, isn't enigma still, you know,
he is from a Saudi elite family,
but a family that kind of has a,
a Yemeni Arabian C kind of genealogy.
Um, so the has no relationship to Afghanistan pastor present,
except at some point in 1980s,
when he went like thousands of other young Saudis first to Pakistan to places
like Beau on the border,
where they wanted to aid the jihad in some capacity.
And for the most part, the air Stein went, opened up hospitals,
some opened up schools,
the bin Laden family had long been based in engineering construction.
So it's thought that he used some of those skills and resources and connections
to build things. Um, you know,
we have images of him firing a gun, uh, for show, right?
It's not clear that he ever actually fired a gun in what we would call combat.
Um, again, I could be corrected by this and I think, you know, there,
there are competing accounts of who he was. So he is kind of a, I mean,
when these figures that who sit up, the pinnacle of this world are, you know,
heroes that people, you know, map their aspirations onto. Right.
And so people like Mullo Omar who was then head of the Taliban
was rare, seen in public.
The current head of Taliban is almost never seen in public. I mean,
there's kind of studied era of, um,
mystery that they have cultivated to make themselves available for all kinds of
fantasies. Right. Do.
You think he believed, so his religious beliefs,
do you think he believed some of the more extreme things
that enable him to commit terrorist acts, maybe put another way,
what makes a man want to become a terrorist and what aspect of bin Laden
made him want to be a terrorist? Right.
Great. Um, I mean, lemme offer for some observations. Uh, I think, you know,
there are others who know more about bin Laden and,
and have far more expertise in Al Qaeda.
So I'm coming this in an adjacent way,
kind of from El Afghanistan and from my historical training.
So this is my 2 cents. So, you know, bear with me. Um, I'm,
I don't have the authoritative account, which, which.
In itself is fascinating because your historian of Afghanistan and the fact that
bin Laden isn't a huge part of your focus is study just means
that bin Laden is not a key part of the history of Afghanistan,
except that America made him a key part of the history of Afghanistan.
I, I would endorse that. Definitely. That's it? I mean, you,
you put it in a very pity pity way. Um, yeah. So listen, he was, he was a,
so he was an engineer. He was said to be a Playboy. Um,
he spent a lot of cash from his family, you know,
like many young Saudis and from some other countries,
he was inspired by this idea that there was jihad in Afghanistan.
It was gonna take down one of the two superpowers, the Soviet union, who,
you know, the red army did murder hundreds of thousands,
perhaps as many as 2 million in, um, African civilians during that conflict,
it it's very, you know, plausible and very, you know,
completely understandable that many young people would see that.
Cause as you know,
the righteous pious fighters for jihad who called themselves,
Mahaine I raid against this evil empire right.
Of a godless Soviet empire that, I mean,
there was even confusion about what the Soviets wanted right now.
Now we know much more about like what the crim wanted, what,
what REEV wanted and how the Soviet elite thought about it because we have many
more of their records, but from the outside, you know,
for Jimmy Carter and then for Reagan,
it looked like the Soviets were making a move on,
on south Asia because they wanted to get to the warm water ports, you know,
which Russians always want supposedly. Right. And it was kind of a,
a move to take over our oil and, you know, to assert world domination, right?
So there are lots of ways in which this looked like good evil in Congress.
It looked like, um, you know, kind of Vietnam again,
but this time this is our chance to get them.
And there are lots of great quotes, uh, I mean, disturbing,
but really revealing quotes that, uh,
American possib America has made about wanting to give the Soviets their
Vietnam. So the CIA funneled, you know,
hundreds of millions of dollars into this project to, to back the Muja,
you know, who Reagan called freedom fighters.
And so bin was part of that universe. He's part of that, you know,
he's swimming in the ocean of these Afghan Muja Dean who out of size, you know,
did 95% of the fighting. They're the ones who died.
They're the ones who defeat to the red army, right?
The Arabs who were there did a lot of fighting, but a lot of it was for,
you know, their purposes. It was to get experience.
It was to kind of create their reputations,
like bin Laden began to force for himself of being spoke in for a global
project. Because by the late eighties, when bin Laden I think was,
was more active and began conspiring with people from other Arab countries,
the idea that, you know, go African power in 85, he's like,
let's get out of here. This is, this is draining the Soviet budget.
It's an embarrassment. Uh, we didn't think about this properly.
Let's focus on restoring, um,
the party and strengthening the Soviet union. Let's get outta this cost,
see war, you know, it's, it's, it's a waste. Um, it's not worth it. We,
you don't lose anything by getting outta Afghanistan. Um, and so their,
their retreat was quite, uh,
effective and successful from the Soviet point of view, right?
It's not what we're seeing now. Uh, what year was the retreat? Um, I mean,
it began Wil can on to 85, you know,
he was a generation younger than the other guys.
He was a critical of the system. He didn't wanna abolish it.
You wanted to reform it. He was a, a true believer in,
in Soviet socialism and in the, and the party as a, a, you know, a monopolist,
right. Mm-hmm <affirmative>. Um,
but he was critical of the old guard and recognized that the party had to change
and, and the whole system had to change to continue to compete.
And so African Afghanistan was one element of this.
And so he pushed the African elites that Moscow was
backing to basically say, listen, we're gonna share power. Um,
and so a figure named nudge, Ebola,
who was a Soviet and intelligence specialists sitting in cobble,
um, agreed. And he said, you,
we need to have a more kind of pluralistic accommodations approach to
our enemies who are backed by the us,
mainly sitting in Pakistan, sitting in Iran, backed by his area of a two degree,
getting money from Saudi. And he said,
let's draw some of them into the government and basically have a,
a kind of unity government mm-hmm <affirmative> that makes some space,
the opposition.
And for the most part with us backing with Pakistani backing,
with Iranian backing and with Saudi backing, the opposition said, no,
we're not going to reconcile. We're gonna push you off the cliff.
And so that story goes on from at least 1987,
the last Soviet red army troops leave early 1989. Um,
but the Naji Belo of government holds on for three more years. It, it is the,
um, I mean, they're still getting some help from the Soviet union.
Its enemies are still getting help from the us mainly. And, um,
it's not to 92 that, that, um,
that they lose and then Moja come to power. They immediately,
you know,
they're deeply fractured and that's sort bin Laden is watching all of this
unroll that's right. And he's, he's part of, HP's also mobile. So he, he,
at one point, you know, goes, um, you know, is in Sudan, you know, he's,
he's moving from place to place. His people are all over the world. In fact,
they, I mean, if you think of the, once the Muja take power, you know, they,
they have difficulties with the Arab fighters too,
and they don't want them coming in and, you know,
messing with the Mogen Moja regardless as like, you know,
this is a national state that we're gonna build, it's gonna be Islamic.
It's gonna be Islamic state, but you can't interfere with us.
And so there are always tensions. And so the Arabs are always kind of,
I would say they were Arab fighters were always interlopers. Um, yes,
the Afghans are happy to take their money, send patients, their hospitals, um,
take their weapons,
but they were never gonna let this be like a Saudi or Egyptian or,
or whatever project mm-hmm <affirmative>. Um,
but then many of those fighters went home. They went back to Syria.
They went back to Egypt. Some wanted to go back to the Saudi Arabia,
but the Saudis very careful. I mean,
the Saudis always used African Afghanistan as a kind of safety valve. In fact,
they had, you know, fundraisers on television. They chartered jets,
filled them with people to fly to Pakistan, um, get out and fish shower and say,
you know, go fight. And it was one way that the, the monarchy,
the Saudi monarchy, um, very cleverly I think created a,
a kind of a skate valve for, would be dissidents in Saudi Arabia. Right.
Just send them abroad. You wanna fight jihad, go do that somewhere.
Don't don't bother the kingdom, but all this became dicier. Um,
in the early nineties,
when some of these guys came back home and some of the scholars around them
said, you know, let's, we've defeat the Soviet, you know, which is a huge,
huge boost.
I think part of the dynamic we see today is that the Taliban victory is a,
a renewed inspiration for people who think, look, we beat the Soviets.
Now we beat the Americans. Mm-hmm <affirmative>.
And so already watching the Soviet retreat across this bridge,
back into his Pakistan. If you see these dramatic images of the, the tanks,
you know, moving a lot of people interpreted this as like, you know,
we are going to change the world.
And now we're turning to the Americans and our,
our local national governments are backed by the Americans.
So this start with the start with those places, and then let's go strike,
let's go strike, you know, the belly of the beast, which is America,
which is New York. And going back to LAN you're question about, you know,
what motivates him, what motivated him? You know, again,
he was not a rigorously trained Islamics scholar.
And that, I think, you know, when I, when this,
when this comes up in our classes, you know, I think especially young people,
I mean, people who weren't even born around 11, I mean, they're,
they're shocked. They, they see, they see his appearance,
they see him pictured in front of a,
a giant bookshelf mm-hmm <affirmative> of Arabic books.
He's got the clash knockoff,
he's got what looks like a religiou scholars library behind him. Right.
But if you look at his words, I mean,
one fascinating thing about just our politics and just one thing that kind of
sums all up. I mean, the fact that on nine 11, we had to have a few people,
a few experts, people like Bernard Ruben, who was an AF Afghanistan expert.
So that was one way in which I think, you know,
I'm not faulting him per personally,
but it's just one way in which that relationship appeared to be, you know,
formed right. Of linking Afghanistan to that moment. Um,
if one looks actually, you know,
what bin Laden was saying in doing people like Richard Clark was studying this,
there were Arab leaders, the Arab press was,
was watching this because he gave some of his first interviews to, uh,
a few newspaper outlets. But speaking of our American kind of, you know,
monolingualism a lot of what you're saying wasn't known.
And so I think for several years,
people weren't reading what bid Laden said. I mean, experts are reading,
reading it in Arabic, but there was great anxiety around tting his works.
So, you know, we have my comp,
we have all this other stuff you can buy the collector works of Lynn and sta ma
whatever you want in whatever language you want,
but bin was taboo for American publishing.
And so it was only a ver in the UK that published a,
a famous volume called messages to the world,
which was the first comin companion of, of Benn's writings.
So he has a mine comp, he has a, a type, does he have a thing with, I mean,
it's a kind of collective works. It's a collective works okay. Of his, he had,
he had, well, like a, like a blog. <laugh> like,
it's a collection of articles versus yeah. These are interviews. These are his,
his missives, his, his declarations, his, um, his decrees.
Right. Um, which, but I think just in terms of, you know, if,
if we zoom out for a second about, you know,
American policy choices and so on the powers,
the be didn't trust us to know what he was really about. I, I put it that way.
And I don't say that in a conspiratorial sense. I just think that it was,
you know, it, it was a taboo. And I think people, you know, there were,
it was a kind of consensus that, um, you know, trust us,
we know we know how to fight Alqaeda right.
And you don't need to know what they're about because they're, they're crazy.
They're, they're fanatics, they're fundamentalists. They hate us.
Remember that language yeah. Uh, us versus them. But if you read bin Laden,
that's when it gets messy.
That's where the bin lad's argumentation is not fundamentally
about Islam. And if you you're sitting here with an Islamic scholar,
he would say, you know, depending on which is Islamic scholar,
they would tend to go through and dissect and negate, you know,
99% of the arguments that melon claimed was an Islam. Right.
But what strikes me as an historian? Who's again, looking at this adjacently um,
if re bin Laden, I mean, the arguments that he make are, first of all,
they're sophisticated. They reflect a,
a mind that is about geopolitics.
He uses terms like imperialism. He knows something about world history.
He knows something about geography. So imperialism is the enemy for him,
or what's the nature of the enemy. It's a, it's a, it's an amalgam.
And he like a good politician, which is what I would call him.
He is adept at speaking in different ways to different audiences.
So if you look at the context of which he speaks,
if you look at messages to the world,
if you look at his writings and it would zoom out now,
and we now have compendia of the writings of Al Qaeda, more broadly,
you can purchase these, you know, they're basically primary source collections.
Um, we now have that for the Taliban. I mean, what's fascinating about,
I think if you'd like this culture acknowledging it's very, you know,
diverse internally is that these people are representatives of
political movements who seek followers. They speak,
they often are very, I'd say skilled at,
at visual imagery. And especially now, I mean, what's fascinating is that,
I mean, the Taliban, you know, used to shoot televisions, they used to,
you know, blow up, uh, VCR, um, you know, videotapes.
Um,
they used to string audio and videocassettes from trees and kind of
ceremonial hangings, right?
That we we're killing this nefarious infidel technology that is
doing the work of Satan. And yet today in PLA I mean,
one of the keys to top line success is that they got really good at using media.
I mean, brilliant at using, uh, the written word,
the spoken word music actually. Um, and you know, Hollywood,
Hollywood is the gold standard. And these guys have studied how to create drama,
how to speak to modern users. I mean, Islamic state did this mean the,
the role of media, new media? I mean,
I am I follow and I am followed by senior Toban leaders, which is,
you know, bizarre, you know, on Twitter, on, on Twitter.
I don't know why they care about me. I'm, I'm nothing, uh, they, they follow,
they follow you on Twitter. I don't know why this is no joke. This is no joke.
So it's,
they're part of our modern world and how they talk and it's how they recruit.
And this is part of the, this is why they are, you know, so, so Ben Laden,
if you bin Laden, he, he speaks multiple languages. I would say it's, uh,
it's environmentalism. You know,
the west is bad because we destroyed the planet.
The west is bad because we abuse women. So in, in class, you know,
uh, especially, you know,
female students are very surprised to learn and actually say, you know, this,
this feminist argument is not, you know, we start with,
you know, this is a murder. This is a person who has taken human life,
innocent life over and over again. And he is, um, you know,
aspirationally genocidal, but to understand what he's about.
So we walk through the texts, read them,
and people are shocked to learn that it's not just about,
you know, quotations in the Qurans thrown together in some irrational fashion.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> he knows. Um, I mean, at the core,
I'd say is the problem of human suffering. And he has a geography of that.
That is mostly Muslim, but he talked about the suffering of cashmere, right.
So if you have a student in your class,
who's from south Asia who knows about Kashmere, you know, he, or she will say,
that's not entirely inaccurate, you know? Yeah.
Indian state commits the trustees in Kashmere. Uh, you know,
Pakistan is even that too, you know, Palestine is an issue, right?
So you have in the American university setting people across the spectrum who
get that, you know, Palestinians have had a raw deal.
And so it's a victimhood is, is central.
And it's Muslim victimhood, which is primary,
but as numbers scholars have have written, and I'm, you know,
I definitely think this is a, a framework for what this's useful. I mean,
in this kind of vocabulary in this, in this framing, in this narrative, um,
today in today's world,
if we think of today's world being post called war 91 to the present,
looking at the series of Gulf wars and seeing the visuals of that, I think that,
you know, I think the American public has been shielded for some of this.
But if you look at, you know, as the,
the carnage of the Iraqi army that
George HW Bush produced, right, or you think of, you know, the,
the images of the suffering of Iraqi children under George
HW, Bush's sanctions us British,
then you have mad Albright answer a question on 60 minutes saying, do you think,
you know, the deaths of half a million Iraq kids is, is worth it,
you is that justified to contain Sam MUE. And she says on camera, yes,
that it's worth it to me. If you put that all together, I mean, American kids.
And of course the American public, they're not always aware of those,
those facts of global history, but these guys are, and they,
they very capably use these images,
use these tropes and use facts. I mean, the fact, I mean, some,
these things are not, are notable. I mean, the, the, I mean,
these estimate about the number of Iraqi, civilian children dead, you know,
that, that came from, I think the Lance and it came from, you know, those,
those are estimates, but looking at point point of view, of, of, of Amman,
of, you know, JFA of Nairobi, you know,
just think around the planet. Um,
and if you see yourself as the victim of this great Imperial power, you know,
you can see why especially young men would be drawn to, uh, Arod of, of,
of self-sacrifice. And the idea is that in,
in killing others,
you are making them feel how you feel. Yeah.
Because they won't listen to your arguments reasonably because they won't,
you know, recognize Palestinian suffering bosy and suffering, right.
To suffering. You go across the planet, right.
Because they won't recognize our suffering.
We're gonna speak to you in the only language that you understand and that's
violence, and look at the violence of, of the post 19 one world, right.
In which American air power really becomes a global, you know,
kind of fact, in the lives of so many people. Um,
and then the big mistake after nine 11, among many, I mean,
fundamentally was taking the terror to some, you know,
30 or 40 countries. Right.
So that you have a more and more of the globe feel you like they're under
attack. Right. And the, and the logic is essentially, it's not, it's not,
it's Reid Laden. It's not, we're going to convert you and turn you into Muslims.
And that's why we're doing this. That, that appears,
that claim does appear at times. But it's,
if you look at any given bin Laden text, I mean,
there are 40 claims in each text. I mean, it's kind of, it's dizzying,
but he's a modern politician. He knows the language of,
of social equality. You know, that there's a class dimension to it.
There is an environmental dimension to it. There's a gender dimension to it.
And yes, there are chronic quotes sprinkled in.
And when he wants to speak that language, he knew that, you know,
he's not a scholar.
So he would often get a few recognized scholars to sign on.
So some of his decorations of jihad had his signature kind of sprinkled in
with like a dozen other,
other signatures from people who were somewhat known or at least, you know,
with titles. Right. Um, so as a kind of intellectual exercise,
it's fascinating to see that he is throwing everything, the wall at one level.
Um, that's one way to see that it's a, it's a,
these are kind of testaments toward recruitment of people who
yes, they're angry. Yes. They're unhappy. And this is what, you know,
I think for our broader public, it's hard to get. You're like, well,
bin LA didn't suffer. He wasn't poor. Like, yeah. I mean,
linen P pot. I mean, they're.
Speaking to, they're empathetic to the suffering, the landscape,
the full landscape of suffering. It's interesting to, to think about suffering,
you know, America, the American public American politicians and leaders,
when they see what is good and evil,
they're often not empathetic to the suffering of others.
And what you're saying has bin Laden,
perhaps accurately could speak to the ignorance of America,
maybe the Soviet union to the suffering of their people.